The Last Leaf
There is a little area west of Washington square called Greenwich Village. The Streets there are
crazy and break themselves into small parts called “places.” These “places” make strange angles and
curves. One street even crosses itself twice. Artists soon came to Greenwich Village, looking for big
windows, high ceilings and low rents. They called themselves a “colony.”
At the top of a three-story brick building Sue and Joanna had their studio. Sue was from Maine,
Joanna from California. They had met at an Italian restaurant, and found that their tastes in art,
potato salad and flared pants where so similar that they moved in together.
That was in May. In November a cold, unseen stranger, whom the doctors called Pneumonia,
visited the colony. He touched one here and there with icy fingers. Over on the east side this killer
travelled easily, finding many victims, but he moved more slowly through the maze of narrow “places.”
Mr. Pneumonia was not a nice old gentleman. It wasn’t fair that he would strike a skinny young
woman who was used to Californian sun and gentle breezes. But he did. He struck Joanna, and she
lay in bed hardly moving, looking out the window at a brick wall.
One morning the busy doctor had a secret talk with Sue in the hallway.
“She has one change in ten,” he said, “but she has to want to live. I think your friend has
decided that she will not get better. Is there anything she lives for?”
“She – she wanted to paint the Bay of Naples someday,” said Sue.
“Paint? Nonsense! Has she anything on her mind worth thinking about – a man, for example?”
“A man?” said Sue, with an annoyed note in her voice. “Is a man worth… No, doctor, there is
nothing like that.”
“Well, that is a problem, then,” said the doctor. “I will do everything that I can do. But once a
patient gives up, medicine loses half its power. You need to get her to ask one question about the
new winter style in pants. Then I will promise you a one-in-five chance for her, instead of one-inten.”
After the doctor had gone Sue cried. then she skipped into Joanna’s room with her drawing
board, whistling a happy tune.
Joanna lay still under the blanket, with her face toward the window. Sue stopped whistling,
thinking she was asleep.
She set up her drawing board and began a pen-and-ink drawing to illustrate a magazine story.
Young artists must climb the ladder to Art by drawing pictures for magazines stories that young
jhnyang.tistory.com
authors write to climb the ladder to Literature.
As she was sketching a silk suit on the figure of the hero, an Idaho cowboy, she heard a low
sound, repeated several times. She went quickly to the bedside.
Joanna’s eyes were open wide. She was looking out the window and counting - counting
backward.
“Twelve,” she said, and little later "eleven"; and then "ten," and "nine"; and then "eight" and "seven",
almost together.
Sue looked out the window. What was there to count? There was only the blank wall of the brick
house twenty meters away. An old, old ivy vine climbed halfway up the brick wall. The cold breath
of fall had taken most of the leaves away, and its skeleton branches hung, almost bare, to the bricks.
“What is it, dear?" asked Sue.
“Six,” whispered Joanna. "They're falling faster now. A few days ago, there were almost a
hundred. It was difficult to count them. But now it’s easy. There goes another one. There are only
five left now."
"Five what, dear? Tell me.”
“Leaves. On the ivy vine. When the last one falls, I must go, too. I've known that for three days.
Didn't the doctor tell you?"
"Oh, I never heard of such nonsense," complained Sue. "What have old ivy leaves to do with
your getting well? Don’t be silly. The doctor told me this morning that your chances for getting
better were – let me think exactly what he said – he said the chances were ten to one! Now, try to
drink some soup, and let me go back to the drawing, so the editor will pay me. Then I will buy
some wine for my sick friend, and some pork chops for my greedy self.”
"You don’t need to get any more wine," said Joanna, looking out the window. “There goes
another one. No, I don’t want any soup. That leaves just four. I want to see the last one fall before
it gets dark. Then I'll go, too."
“Joanna, dear,” said Sue, bending over her, "will you promise me to keep your eyes closed, and
not look out the window until I am done working? I must hand those drawings in by tomorrow.”
"Couldn't you draw in the other room?" asked Joanna, coldly.
“I’d rather be here beside you,” said Sue. “Besides, I don’t want you looking at those silly ivy
leaves.”
jhnyang.tistory.com
"Tell me as soon as you are finished," said Joanna, closing her eyes, and lying as white and still
as a fallen statue, "because I want to see the last one fall. I'm tired of waiting. I'm tired of thinking.
I want to lose my hold on everything, and go sailing down, down, just like one of those poor, tired
leaves."
"Try to sleep," said Sue. "I must call Behrman up to be my model for the story about the old
miner. I'll only be gone a minute. Don't move 'til I come back."
Old Behrman was a painter who lived on the ground floor beneath them. He was past sixty and
had a beard like Moses. Behrman was a failure in art. For forty years he had painted a masterpiece
but had done only a little painting for advertisements. He earned a little by serving as a model for
the young artists in the colony who could not afford to pay the price of a professional. He drank a
lot of gin, and still talked about his coming masterpiece. He thought of himself as the protector of
Sue and Joanna. But everyone else thought he was a fierce and tough old man.
Sue found Behrman smelling strongly of gin in his badly lighted room down below. In one
corner was a blank canvas on an easel that had been waiting for twenty-five years for the first line
of his masterpiece. She told him Joanna’s belief about the leaves, and how she feared that Joanna,
who was so weak and fragile, would actually float away like a leaf herself.
Old Behrman’s red eyes are filled with tears as he shouted with anger at such idiotic imaginings.
“What!” he cried. “Is there someone in the world foolish enough to die because leaves drop off
a vine? I have never heard such a thing. No, I will not pose as a model for your stupid old miner.
Why did you allow this foolishness to come into her brain? Oh, poor little Miss Joanna.”
"She is very ill and weak," said Sue, "and the fever has filled her mind with strange ideas. Mr.
Behrman, if you don’t want to pose for me, you don’t have to. But I think you are a horrible old –
old thing.”
“You are a typical woman!” yelled Behrman.
"Who said I will not pose? Come on. I have been ready to pose for half an hour. God! What a
terrible place for someone as good as Miss Joanna to be sick. When I paint my masterpiece, we
will go away together. God!”
Joanna was sleeping when they went upstairs. Sue pulled the shades down and led Behrman
into the other room. They peered out the window fearfully at the ivy vine. Then they looked each
other for a moment without speaking. Cold rain was falling, mixed with snow. Behrman posed as
an old miner, and Sue drew him.
When Sue got up the next morning, after an hour’s sleep, she found Joanna with dull, wide
jhnyang.tistory.com
open eyes staring at the drawn green shade.
"Pull it up, I want to see," she ordered, in a whisper.
Wearily Sue obeyed.
Amazingly, after the heavy rain and fierce gust of wind that had gone on all night, there was
an ivy leaf left on the brick wall. It was the last one. It was still dark green near the stem but turning
yellow at the edges. it hung bravely from the branch about six meters above the ground.
"It is the last one," said Joanna. "I thought it would surely fall during the night. I heard the wind.
It will fall to-day, and I shall die at the same time."
"Dear, dear!" said Sue, leaning her tired face down to the pillow, "think of me, if you won't think
of yourself. What would I do?"
But Joanna did not answer. The loneliest thing in all the world is a soul when it is getting ready
to go on its mysterious, far journey. The ties that bound her to friendship and to earth were coming
loose.
The day wore away, and even through the twilight they could see the lone ivy leaf clinging to
its stem against wall. And then, with the coming of the night the north wind came again, and rain
beat against the window.
When it was light enough, Joanna commanded that the shades be pulled open again.
The ivy leaf was still there.
Joanna lay for a long time looking at it. And then she called to Sue, who was stirring chicken
soup over the gas stove.
"I've been a bad girl, Suzie," said Joanna. "Something has made that last leaf stay there to show
me how wicked I was. It is a sin to want to die. You may bring me a little soup now, and some milk
with a little wine in it, and – no, bring me a hand-mirror first, and pack some pillows around me,
and I will sit up and watch you cook.
And hour later she said, "Suzie, someday I hope to paint the Bay of Naples."
The doctor came in the afternoon, and secretly talked to Sue in the hallway as he left.
“Even chances,” said the doctor, taking Sue’s thin, shaking hand in his. “With good nursing you’ll
win. And now I must see another patient downstairs. His name is Behrman, he’s some kind of artist,
I believe. He also has Pneumonia. He is an old, weak. There is no hope for him. but we will take
him to hospital to be more comfortable.”
jhnyang.tistory.com
The next day the doctor said to Sue, "She's out of danger. You won. Just give her good food
and care – that’s all.”
And that afternoon Sue came to the bed where Joanna lay, happily knitting a bright blue scarf,
and put one arm right around her.
"I have something to tell you, Jo,” she said. "Mr. Behrman died of pneumonia today in the
hospital. He was sick for only two days. The janitor found him on the morning of the first day in his
room downstairs. He was in awful pain. His clothes and shoes were wet through and icy cold. They
couldn't imagine where he had been on such a dreadful night. And then they found a lantern, still
lit, and a ladder, some brushes, and a palette with green and yellow colors mixed on it. Look out
the window, dear, at the last ivy leaf on the wall. Didn't you wonder why it never fluttered or moved?
Ah, darling, it’s Behrman’s masterpiece – he painted it the night the last leaf fell.
